
<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# Active travel-based accessibility: A review of data sources and needs from a Canadian perspective

<!-- badges: start -->
<!-- badges: end -->

Mahdis Moghadasi (School of Earth, Environment and Society, McMaster
University)  
Jeneva Beairsto (Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University)  
Meghan Winters (Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University)  
Antonio Paez (School of Earth, Environment and Society, McMaster
University)

## Abstract

Active travel is a key element to achieve robust and healthy urban
transportation polycultures. As analysis of transportation needs in
cities shifts from a focus on mobility to accessibility, the need to
assess accessibility by cycling and walking has become incresingly
pressing. The distinguishing features of these modes – lower speeds,
shorter trips, potentially different purposes compared to motorized
trips – means that the data inputs required for accessibility analysis
are not necessarily the same as those used for the study of
accessibility for motorized travel. The objective of this review is to
assess the sources of data and data needs to implement active
accessibility analysis. Walking-specific and cycling-specific geographic
accessibility measures and data applied within recently published
literature are reviewed. Walking and cycling accessibility measures are
compared in terms of the types of metrics, the origins and destinations
considered, geographic scales, and travel time or distance calculations.
In comparing approaches for walking versus cycling, this report also
highlights possible considerations, challenges, and questions that
emerge when considering the future of active travel accessibility-based
analysis. The discussion in this review is centered on the Canadian
context but the lessons may be more broadly applicable to other national
contexts.

## Introduction

Active travel is a key component of efforts in urban areas as they try
to achieve more robust and healthy urban transportation polycultures
(Lavery, Páez, and Kanaroglou 2013; Millera 2011; Lira and Paez 2021).
Cycling and walking are effective modes for short- and mid-range travel
in urban areas that have, over a period of decades, grown to accommodate
travel by automobile (Brown, Morris, and Taylor 2009; Wiersma et al.
2020) while treating other modes almost as afterthoughts (Brezina, Leth,
and Lemmerer 2020; Koglin 2020; Ruffino and Jarre 2021). Along with a
focus on motorized travel, the focus of transportation planning has been
to plan for mobility mainly by car. Transportation and land use systems
have been designed to produce mobility, and this is reflected in the use
of measures of efficiency that ignore the reason for most travel, which
is to reach destinations (S. L. Handy and Niemeier 1997).

The idea of producing mobility seems intuitive when planning for
inexpensive motorized travel, in an era when automobile users have been,
as a matter of policy, shielded from paying – and even becoming aware –
of the full cost of their travel (Taylor 2006). In recognition of the
contradiction of trying to generate mobility while also hoping to reduce
the ill effects of mobility, an argument in the transportation
literature for decades has been to shift from mobility-based to
accessibility-based planning (S. L. Handy and Niemeier 1997; Social
Exclusion Unit 2003). Transportation accessibility is commonly defined
as the potential of transportation-land use systems to generate access
to opportunities (Páez, Scott, and Morency 2012) and conceptually
strikes at the heart of wasteful mobility-based planning by focusing on
the ability to reach destinations. Despite mixed evidence regarding the
adoption of accessibility in planning practice (Boisjoly and El-Geneidy
2017; Proffitt et al. 2019) there are reasons to believe that the future
belongs to accessibility-based planning (S. Handy 2020).

The relevance of accessibility-based planning is even more evident when
active modes are considered: who would rather make long trips if
equivalent destinations could be reached with shorter trips? Not only
can pedestrians and cyclists not be shielded from the cost of travel,
the effort of reaching destinations is inherently visceral (Hsu and Tsai
2014; Iseki and Tingstrom 2014; Páez et al. 2020). As interest in active
travel-based accessibility (ATB accessibility) grows globally
(Arranz-López et al. 2019; Li, Huang, and Axhausen 2020; Ortega et al.
2021; Rosas-Satizábal, Guzman, and Oviedo 2020), transportation scholars
have built on decades-worth of accessibility research that mainly
focused on motorized travel. In principle, accessibility analysis is
sufficiently general to be applicable for ATB accessibility analysis. In
practice, it is important to recognize the differences between motorized
and active travel, and how they can impact their implementation with a
focus on active travel (Iacono, Krizek, and El-Geneidy 2010). Compared
to motorized travel, active travel tends to be slower, happens at
smaller scales, is used to reach potentially different destinations, and
involves costs, such as physical effort, that are usually are ignored in
the analysis of motorized travel.

The objective of the present study is to investigate ATB accessibility
with a focus on data sources and needs, using Canada as case study. The
research is prompted by a recent Canadian project that has been tasked
with developing data-driven standards for the analysis of transportation
equity. The need to propose methods that can be used consistently across
regions requires a sound understanding of how analysis and outputs can
be conditioned by the data inputs. it is important to acknowledge that
other reviews of ATB accessibility measures exist (Geurs and Van Wee
2004; Iacono, Krizek, and El-Geneidy 2010; Maghelal and Capp 2011; Talen
and Koschinsky 2013; Vale, Saraiva, and Pereira 2016). The contribution
of this paper is to fill a gap in the literature by focusing on the data
required by various measures of ATB accessibility and comparing measures
that can be implemented consistently in different contexts, as well as
data needs for consistent implementation of the rest.

The reminder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a
review of methods. Section 3 presents a categorization of the required
data according to each of the accessibility measurements. Section 4
provides Important considerations and possible challenges for
calculating accessibility by active mode; discussions and conclusions
are provided in Section 5.

## References

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-arranz2019" class="csl-entry">

Arranz-López, Aldo, Julio A Soria-Lara, Frank Witlox, and Antonio Páez.
2019. “Measuring Relative Non-Motorized Accessibility to Retail
Activities.” *International Journal of Sustainable Transportation* 13
(9): 639–51.

</div>

<div id="ref-boisjoly2017" class="csl-entry">

Boisjoly, Geneviève, and Ahmed M El-Geneidy. 2017. “How to Get There? A
Critical Assessment of Accessibility Objectives and Indicators in
Metropolitan Transportation Plans.” *Transport Policy* 55: 38–50.

</div>

<div id="ref-brezina2020" class="csl-entry">

Brezina, Tadej, Ulrich Leth, and Helmut Lemmerer. 2020. “Mental Barriers
in Planning for Cycling.” In *The Politics of Cycling Infrastructure*,
73–94. Policy Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-brown2009" class="csl-entry">

Brown, Jeffrey R, Eric A Morris, and Brian D Taylor. 2009. “Planning for
Cars in Cities: Planners, Engineers, and Freeways in the 20th Century.”
*Journal of the American Planning Association* 75 (2): 161–77.

</div>

<div id="ref-geurs2004" class="csl-entry">

Geurs, Karst T, and Bert Van Wee. 2004. “Accessibility Evaluation of
Land-Use and Transport Strategies: Review and Research Directions.”
*Journal of Transport Geography* 12 (2): 127–40.

</div>

<div id="ref-handy2020" class="csl-entry">

Handy, Susan. 2020. “Is Accessibility an Idea Whose Time Has Finally
Come?” *Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment* 83:
102319.

</div>

<div id="ref-handy1997measuring" class="csl-entry">

Handy, Susan L, and Debbie A Niemeier. 1997. “Measuring Accessibility:
An Exploration of Issues and Alternatives.” *Environment and Planning A*
29 (7): 1175–94.

</div>

<div id="ref-hsu2014" class="csl-entry">

Hsu, Chaug-Ing, and Yau-Ching Tsai. 2014. “An Energy Expenditure
Approach for Estimating Walking Distance.” *Environment and Planning B:
Planning and Design* 41 (2): 289–306.

</div>

<div id="ref-iacono2010" class="csl-entry">

Iacono, Michael, Kevin J Krizek, and Ahmed El-Geneidy. 2010. “Measuring
Non-Motorized Accessibility: Issues, Alternatives, and Execution.”
*Journal of Transport Geography* 18 (1): 133–40.

</div>

<div id="ref-iseki2014" class="csl-entry">

Iseki, Hiroyuki, and Matthew Tingstrom. 2014. “A New Approach for
Bikeshed Analysis with Consideration of Topography, Street Connectivity,
and Energy Consumption.” *Computers, Environment and Urban Systems* 48:
166–77.

</div>

<div id="ref-koglin2020" class="csl-entry">

Koglin, Till. 2020. “Spatial Dimensions of the Marginalisation of
Cycling–Marginalization Through Rationalisation?” In *The Politics of
Cycling Infrastructure*, 55–72. Policy Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-lavery2013" class="csl-entry">

Lavery, TA, Antonio Páez, and Pavlos S Kanaroglou. 2013. “Driving Out of
Choices: An Investigation of Transport Modality in a University Sample.”
*Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice* 57: 37–46.

</div>

<div id="ref-li2020" class="csl-entry">

Li, Aoyong, Yizhe Huang, and Kay W Axhausen. 2020. “An Approach to
Imputing Destination Activities for Inclusion in Measures of Bicycle
Accessibility.” *Journal of Transport Geography* 82: 102566.

</div>

<div id="ref-lira2021" class="csl-entry">

Lira, Beatriz Mella, and Antonio Paez. 2021. “Do Drivers Dream of
Walking? An Investigation of Travel Mode Dissonance from the Perspective
of Affective Values.” *Journal of Transport & Health* 20: 101015.

</div>

<div id="ref-maghelal2011" class="csl-entry">

Maghelal, Praveen K, and Cara Jean Capp. 2011. “Walkability: A Review of
Existing Pedestrian Indices.” *Journal of the Urban & Regional
Information Systems Association* 23 (2).

</div>

<div id="ref-millera2011" class="csl-entry">

Millera, Harvey J. 2011. “Collaborative Mobility: Using Geographic
Information Science to Cultivate Cooperative Transportation Systems.”
*Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences* 21: 24–28.

</div>

<div id="ref-ortega2021evaluating" class="csl-entry">

Ortega, Emilio, BelÉN MartÍN, MarÍA Eugenia LÓPez-Lambas, and Julio A
Soria-Lara. 2021. “Evaluating the Impact of Urban Design Scenarios on
Walking Accessibility: The Case of the Madrid ‘Centro’district.”
*Sustainable Cities and Society* 74: 103156.

</div>

<div id="ref-paez2020" class="csl-entry">

Páez, Antonio, Zoha Anjum, Sarah E Dickson-Anderson, Corinne J
Schuster-Wallace, Belén Martı́n Ramos, and Christopher D Higgins. 2020.
“Comparing Distance, Time, and Metabolic Energy Cost Functions for
Walking Accessibility in Infrastructure-Poor Regions.” *Journal of
Transport Geography* 82: 102564.

</div>

<div id="ref-paez2012" class="csl-entry">

Páez, Antonio, Darren M Scott, and Catherine Morency. 2012. “Measuring
Accessibility: Positive and Normative Implementations of Various
Accessibility Indicators.” *Journal of Transport Geography* 25: 141–53.

</div>

<div id="ref-proffitt2019" class="csl-entry">

Proffitt, David G, Keith Bartholomew, Reid Ewing, and Harvey J Miller.
2019. “Accessibility Planning in American Metropolitan Areas: Are We
There Yet?” *Urban Studies* 56 (1): 167–92.

</div>

<div id="ref-rosas2020" class="csl-entry">

Rosas-Satizábal, Daniel, Luis A Guzman, and Daniel Oviedo. 2020.
“Cycling Diversity, Accessibility, and Equality: An Analysis of Cycling
Commuting in Bogotá.” *Transportation Research Part D: Transport and
Environment* 88: 102562.

</div>

<div id="ref-ruffino2021" class="csl-entry">

Ruffino, Paolo, and Matteo Jarre. 2021. “Appraisal of Cycling and
Pedestrian Projects.” In *Advances in Transport Policy and Planning*,
7:165–203. Elsevier.

</div>

<div id="ref-unit2003" class="csl-entry">

Social Exclusion Unit. 2003. “Making the Connections: Final Report on
Transportation and Social Exclusion.” *Social Exclusion Unit. Retrieved
September* 20: 2015.

</div>

<div id="ref-talen2013" class="csl-entry">

Talen, Emily, and Julia Koschinsky. 2013. “The Walkable Neighborhood: A
Literature Review.” *International Journal of Sustainable Land Use and
Urban Planning* 1 (1).

</div>

<div id="ref-taylor2006" class="csl-entry">

Taylor, Brian D. 2006. “Putting a Price on Mobility: Cars and
Contradictions in Planning.” *Journal of the American Planning
Association* 72 (3): 279–84.

</div>

<div id="ref-vale2016active" class="csl-entry">

Vale, David S, Miguel Saraiva, and Mauro Pereira. 2016. “Active
Accessibility: A Review of Operational Measures of Walking and Cycling
Accessibility.” *Journal of Transport and Land Use* 9 (1): 209–35.

</div>

<div id="ref-wiersma2020" class="csl-entry">

Wiersma, JK et al. 2020. “Commuting Patterns and Car Dependency in Urban
Regions.” *Journal of Transport Geography* 84 (C).

</div>

</div>
